The female reproductive system includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and
vagina.
The male reproductive system includes the testes, epididymis, vas deferens, prostate gland, and
penis.
Gametes are the reproductive cells: sperm in males and ova (eggs) in females.
The ovaries produce the primary female sex hormones: estrogen and progesterone.
The testes produce testosterone, the primary male sex hormone, which regulates sperm
production.
Spermatogenesis is the process of sperm cell development, occurring in the seminiferous
tubules.
Ovulation is the release of a mature egg from the ovary, typically occurring around day 14 of a
28-day cycle.
The fallopian tubes are the primary site where fertilization of the egg by sperm occurs.
The endometrium is the inner lining of the uterus that thickens each month in preparation for
a potential pregnancy.
Menstruation is the shedding of the endometrial lining when fertilization does not occur.
The cervix is the lower, narrow portion of the uterus that opens into the vagina.
The prostate gland secretes a fluid that nourishes and protects sperm.
The epididymis is a coiled tube where sperm are stored and gain motility.
The pituitary gland secretes FSH (Follicle-Stimulating Hormone) and LH (Luteinizing Hormone)
to regulate reproduction.
In females, FSH stimulates the growth of ovarian follicles.
In males, LH stimulates the Leydig cells in the testes to produce testosterone.
Zygote is the term for a fertilized egg before it begins cell division.
Implantation is the process by which a developing embryo attaches to the uterine wall.
The placenta is a temporary organ that provides oxygen and nutrients to the developing fetus.
Gestation is the period of development from fertilization to birth, averaging 40 weeks in
humans.
Menopause is the permanent cessation of the menstrual cycle, usually occurring between ages
45 and 55.
Puberty is the period during which adolescents reach sexual maturity and become capable of
reproduction.
Secondary sexual characteristics include breast development in females and facial hair growth
in males.
Endometriosis is a condition where tissue similar to the uterine lining grows outside the
uterus, causing pain.
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) is a hormonal disorder common among women of
reproductive age.
Erectile dysfunction is the inability to achieve or maintain an erection firm enough for sexual
intercourse.
Bacterial vaginosis is an overgrowth of bacteria in the vagina, causing discharge and odor.
Candidiasis (yeast infection) is a fungal infection caused by an overgrowth of Candida albicans.
STIs (Sexually Transmitted Infections) include chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, and HIV.
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) is a common STI that can lead to cervical cancer; vaccines are
available for prevention.
Contraception refers to methods or devices used to prevent pregnancy, such as condoms or
birth control pills.
Vasectomy is a surgical procedure for male sterilization involving the cutting of the vas
deferens.
Tubal ligation is a surgical procedure for female sterilization where the fallopian tubes are
blocked or cut.
The scrotum is the external sac that houses the testes and regulates their temperature for
sperm viability.
Amenorrhea is the medical term for the absence of menstruation.
Dysmenorrhea refers to painful menstrual cramps.
The follicular phase of the menstrual cycle begins on the first day of menses and ends with
ovulation.
The luteal phase follows ovulation and is characterized by high levels of progesterone.
Infertility is generally defined as the inability to conceive after one year of regular, unprotected
intercourse.
Semen is the fluid containing sperm and secretions from the seminal vesicles, prostate, and
bulbourethral glands.
The vulva is the collective term for the external female genitalia.
Ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus, most commonly in
a fallopian tube.
The umbilical cord connects the fetus to the placenta, carrying oxygen and nutrients.
Amniotic fluid surrounds and cushions the fetus within the amniotic sac.
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) is a non-cancerous enlargement of the prostate common in
aging men.
Oxytocin is a hormone released during labor that stimulates uterine contractions.
Prolactin is the primary hormone responsible for stimulating milk production (lactation).
Testicular torsion is a medical emergency where the spermatic cord twists, cutting off blood
supply to the testis.
A Pap smear is a screening test used to detect potentially precancerous processes in the cervix.
Safe sex practices, including the use of barrier methods, significantly reduce the risk of STI
transmission.
